---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/03-essay-plans/philosophy-essay-plans/conscience-requires-god-to-have-authority/","tags":["exams","essays"],"noteIcon":"","updated":"2026-03-04T08:40:49.390+00:00"}
---

## plan

| Theme            | For                             | Against                                                                   | Evaluation |
| ---------------- | ------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------- |
| God invented it  |                                 | literally no evidence bruh                                                |            |
| multiculturalism | there are some universal morals | no there ain't.                                                           |            |
| Irrelevancy      |                                 | clearly it already has authority. Whether or not God exists is irrelevant |            |

Ultimately, the proposal that conscience requires God to have authority is so ridiculous in it's lack of logical weighting, empirical evidence, and sheer irrelevancy to the 'authority' of conscience, that we have no other option to conclude that conscience does not require God to have authority.

Aquinas argues that conscience comes from God, therefore it has authority. As conscience is 'god-given reason', this avoids the possible problem of evil decision making being caused by God, whilst still arguing that conscience is related to God — that we feel guilt because of moral wrongdoing or sin, etc. This is a weak point because internal logical consistency doesn't stop this concept from having no logical basis to exist. Aquinas never argues about *why* God created conscience, so even if one is a Christian, they have no reason to accept that God created conscience. Aquinas' concept of conscience fundamentally fails on the basis that it is entirely fiction and should not even be considered a genuine concept of consciousness. Overall, it's clear that Aquinas' idea of conscience fails to be a convincing argument for conscience requiring God to have authority, because it isn't an argument at all — merely a statement of what Aquinas believed without logical basis. 

However, some may argue that the presence of 'universal' morals proves Aquinas right, despite logical baselessness. Despite humans differing massively across time and location in their culture, there are certain morals that pop up consistently — like an aversion to murder and incest. This unusual consistency points to human's morals coming from beyond ourselves — i.e. from God — and that's why this pattern exists: because it needs the authority of a higher being to have effect, otherwise it wouldn't exist. A stronger point is that there are other explanations for this consistency that don't include God. Put simply, the reason why there is a consistent human aversion to murder and incest is because society could not continue to exist if these were widespread: less children would be born and we wouldn't be able to reach the replacement birthrate necessary. The fact that it is these specific morals that are (at least somewhat) universal proves that, overall, the argument that their presence proves Aquinas right — insofar as their existence points to a higher being — is incredibly weak, due to the principle of Occam's Razor; there is already a simpler explanation in that universal morals exist in order to continue human existence, and so Aquinas' idea of conscience not only has no logical proof, but also no evidential proof.

But there is a final point in Aquinas' favour: necessary proof. If God did not create conscience, then it would have no authority. This would mean that it is necessary for God to have created conscience, otherwise it would have no authority over us — which is obviously not the case. This argument solves the problems of logical and evidential origin by completely skirting around them: it isn't necessary for the concept of God-having-created-conscience to have evidential proof or even external logical consistency if it is something with is necessarily true. This argument fails entirely on a similar basis that it has failed before: being a completely unnecessary explanation. The reality is that conscience has authority over us, and whether or not God created it is an unknowable factor that ultimately does not change the reality of the matter. On top of this, for something to be necessarily true, it must be inherently contradictory to imagine it false: a quality of which the argument 'God must have created conscience, otherwise it wouldn't have authority' fundamentally does not have, because it is perfectly realistic to imagine that God did not create conscience, but that it still has authority.

In conclusion, the argument that conscience requires God to have authority entirely fails on multiple faces by the same fallacy: Occam's Razor. Aquinas' concept of conscience as being created by God fails to be the best explanation for the various quirks of conscience (universal morals and it's authority over us), ending up in a concept that not only has arguments counting against it, but no arguments that support it. Therefore, we must conclude that conscience does not require God to have authority.

I'm sorry I was just not thinking while writing this. It be like that.