---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/philosophy/01-philosophy/religious-language/101/","updated":"2025-11-18T09:29:56.207+00:00"}
---

#intro 

```table-of-contents
```
# If God is transcendent and ineffable, how can we describe God in any meaningful way?

I.e. how do we overcome the epistemic gap?

# Checklist Exam board

1. both the via negativa and via positiva ways
2. considered whether language can be used in any adequate or meaningful sense to talk about God
3. evaluated uses of symbol, analogy and myth, language as a game; to help communicate human understanding of God
4. are conversations about God meaningful/intelligible if we use symbol?
5. reflected on the [[Views of Aquinas\|Views of Aquinas]], [[Views of Paul Tillich\|Views of Paul Tillich]], and the [[views of Ludwig Wittingstein\|views of Ludwig Wittingstein]]

# Useful definitions

**Univocal**: words mean the same things in different situations (like colours.)

**Equivocal**: words which have totally different meanings depending on the context (dining table, periodic table)

**Cognitive language:** language based on facts, facts that are known to be true through knowledge. (e.g. The cat is asleep on the chair.)

**Non-cognitive language:** language that cannot be proven to be true or false through knowledge (emotive, moral, and ethical language. Like saying "yippee!")


## What do we mean by religious language?

- *Specialist terms*- life 'Eucharist, 'messiah', etc.
- *Old fashioned words* from acts of worship: 'thou art', and 'blessed be he'
- *Truth-claims*- i.e. statements about what is or is not the case ('Jesus is alive today)
- *Expressing feelings/emotions:* 'we are truly sorry and repent for all our sins'
- used to *announce* something has happened or is about to happen: "I baptize you in the name of the Lord" is using Religious language performatively
- *Prescriptively*: encouraging people not to act certain ways ("Honour your father and mother... you shall not murder.")

------------
## Terminology (again)

A MYTH is a story that has deep explanatory or symbolic resonance for a culture and one that is believed to be true by those who tell it. The term is sometimes used pejoratively in reference to common beliefs of a culture or for the beliefs of a religion to imply that the story is both fanciful and fictional.

A PARABLE is a story that is told to illustrate a religious, moral or philosophical idea. In rhetoric, a PARABLE ('comparison' or 'similitude') was originally the name given by Greek rhetoricians to any fictive illustration introduced in the form of a brief narrative.

A SYMBOL is a representation of an idea, thing, concept, or quality.
	A word, for example, is a SYMBOL of language, which references its own definition. That is, it "stands for" some idea, thing, concept, or quality, as defined by its given language.

A METAPHOR is a figure of speech that is used to paint one concept with the attributes normally associated with another.

An ANALOGY is a comparison between two things. ANALOGIES are often used to introduce new concepts, by comparing them to something familiar, or to support political and philosophical arguments.

A PROPOSITION is what is asserted as the result of uttering a sentence. In other words, it is the meaning of the sentence, rather than the sentence itself. Different sentences can express the same PROPOSITION, if they have the same meaning.

A SIMILIE is a figure of speech that expresses a resemblance between things of different kinds (usually formed with  'like' or 'as')

-----
# Via affirmativia (the cataphatic way)

- in religious language it is assumed that God can be spoken of in the affirmative- that we can make positive claims about him. We do this by using positive qualities of human experience and applying them to God
- For example, there is qualities such as 'goodness', 'truth' and 'love' which we understand in our own lives and experiences. These can also be applied to God- it makes sense to speak of God as 'good' or 'just' etc
- adherents include Aquinas, Augustine, and Anselm

## Weaknesses to this approach

> *"The first time when you seek God, you only find darkness: and as it were a cloud of unknowing... This darkness and this cloud is, whatever you do, between you and God, and... you may not see him clearly by the light of your understanding in your reason... for if ever you shall feel him or see him... it is right always to be in this cloud in this darkness."*

		 Literally just the epistemic gap. I am fucking sick of this shite. 

- God is infinite and wholly immaterial and transcendent- so how can 'God talk' tell us real facts about God if he is not a being to which the human language of nouns, adjectives and verbs can apply?
	- IT'S THE FUCKING ==**EPISTEMIC GAP**==
- ==**Language is subjective.**== People have different concepts of justice, love, kindness, etc
- It's ==**misleading**==- if we say God is a father or a shepherd, then many people may think that God has a body, or is male, or has faults. What about 'God is love' or 'God is good'?
	- some argue that it is better to accept the mysteries of God than try to pin God down using human/flawed concepts. 

# Via negativa (the apophatic way)

- literally means the 'negative way' because God can only be described in terms of what God is not.
		- apophatic comes from the Greek word 'apophasis'- which means 'negation.'
	- It argues that God is transcendent so you cannot say what God is.
- However you can clearly say what God is not; 
	- God is not a human being because God is transcendent, so God cannot have a body.
- Equally, when Christians say God is good they may not know exactly what they mean, when they use the word 'good'
	- but they know for sure that God is not evil.

==Arguably, speaking about God in negative terms avoids the problem of misrepresenting God.==

**Ultimately, language cannot describe God.**
- people who believe in the apophatic way are not saying that you cannot say things about God- such as 'God is /omniscient/omnibenevolent etc', but that this language does *not actually tell us* about God *because our knowledge* of goodness *is that of a human being.*
	- OUR LANGUAGE IS CREATED BY US, AND SO IS FLAWED IN THE SAME WAYS THAT WE ARE
		- ==**ITS THE FUCKING EPISTEMIC GAP!!**
- If we talk about God being all-knowing then we *can* debate what this means, but in the end we cannot know **for certain** what it is to be all knowing.

	Many religious people have maintained that philosophy and talk about God are misleading and that instead of bringing us closer to an understanding of God, language may have the opposite effect.
	 The way to know God is to remove language itself- since it places God in the limits of human language. **Instead** emphasis should be given to *mysticism, spirituality & prayer*, as paths to a deeper understanding of God.
## Supporting scholars

### Fake Dionysius

The apophatic way was developed by the early church writer Pseudo Dionysius, or Dionysius the Aeropagite.
- His writings originated much later than the time of the apostles- because he is not the Dionysius of the Acts of the Apostles. This is why he is called 'pseudo'

> If we say God is good then we have to say God is not good, because we do not really know what it means to say God is Good. In 'The mystical theology'- the fake god stated that God is 'beyond assertion' and 'beyond denial' - whatever you say about God ultimately does not tell us anything about God, and you cannot say absolutely what God is not.
> 	In 'Divine names' and 'the mystical union'- he develops the view that through prayer an individual could be united with God through abandoning senses, images and language.

Influenced by Plato, he argued that the soul's search for God was held back by the demands of the body and the mind's desire for understanding.
=> stop trying to use logic and arguments! Allow God to speak in the stillness- accepting God will remain a mystery.

### Maimonides

He is a Jewish 12th century philosopher.

He argues that human beings can know that God exists but not anything about God, because God is not like human beings
- he finds support in Jewish scriptures where God is described as being 'i am who i am'- literally called Yawhey (I am)- he is beyond any description.
- he speaks about the dangers of anthropomorphising God
	- allows man to compare himself to God based on characteristics
		- such as with sex, race, etc
 
 **The hand and mouth of God**
 Rather we come nearer to knowledge of God through negative attributes, for example God is not limited, and so on. 
 >He gives the example of a ship to illustrate what he meant. 
 >	Essentially, you learn about something by describing what it is not. i.e. the process of elimination. 
 THIS IS THE ONENOTE FOR THIS LESSON IF YOU WANT TO SEE IT. 
 https://whsat.sharepoint.com/sites/Section_WHS14021/_layouts/15/Doc.aspx?sourcedoc={36aa2c81-36fa-44cc-b896-64f426a01bf5}&action=view&wd=target%28Leah%20Johnston%2FPaper%201.one%7Cc6a694ad-780f-4fce-a139-4a1cdca2eca1%2FRel%20Lang%20via%20affirmativa%5C%2Fnegativa%7C81e2f779-ea97-4544-9285-1ff6064f3234%2F%29&wdorigin=NavigationUrl

### St. John of the Cross; a famous mystic

God is neither material, not the vital, nor the mental, nor the personal soul. He is nothing created. He is not within creation.

## Background to the apophatic way

It came from the philosophy of **Plotinus** in the second century CE. **Plotinus** was at the centre of a movement that reviewed interest in the philosophy of **Plato**. He linked Plato's **Form of the Good** with God. Because of this link God is seen as completely separate and beyond this world, just as the **Form of the Good** is the highest **Form** and separate from the other forms.


## Weaknesses of the apophatic way

Anthony Flew argues that if we say that God is invisible, soundless, incorporeal, and so on, there is little difference between our definition of God and our definition of nothingness. 

- you could say everything via negativa and it ends up being via positiva.

- it is a way of recognising that we have to go beyond our normal everyday experiences